# Baltimore's tranist Based Cataylst

Lately, I’ve been thinking about rail transit in Baltimore. Like many others, I’m an advocate for rail, and I believe Baltimore and the State of Maryland should prioritize investment in rail to grow the economy and improve community health.  Rail development has the potential to be a catalyst project that simultaneously addresses issues in housing, crime, community health, and employment – multiple aspects that all need attention. 

There are many individuals and organizations actively involved in and advocating for the expansion of rail projects in the Baltimore area. These advocates are aware of the way that upgrading rail development can be catalysts for cities. Throughout the world, what many thriving cities have in common is that they have a well-utilized rail system. 

Ideally, Baltimore would  have a more comprehensive and extensive rail transit network, but there have been challenges and roadblocks to reaching this ideal.  These challenges include the challenges financing, construction, implementation, and development of transit systems. 

As the state works to overcome these challenges, I think it’s important to emphasize how transformative rail infrastructure development can be and how they can serve as catalyst projects that have the ability to truly impact society in multidimensional ways. 

How can rail development work as a catalyst to improve urban living and community health?

## An illustration of how rail can catalyze growth

It’s 2040. Over the past two decades, Maryland and Baltimore have pursued ambitious rail transit projects. Baltimore has completed the red line, connecting west Baltimore to jobs and other parts of the city. The Red Line has a dedicated right-of-way, significantly reducing commute times along its route.

Because of the successful Red Line, property values in West Baltimore have increased. Neighborhoods close to the city now have better access to amenities, leading to increased desirability. Residents also have easier access to quality jobs. Densely packed row homes, previously limited by parking and space, are now more attractive due to their proximity to reliable public transportation.

Baltimore’s row-home layout and narrow street-based infrastructure has been reshaped by these Rail projects. Residents no longer stress over car ownership or parking space. They have smoother commutes to work and school, fostering stronger community connections and economic opportunities.

With improved neighborhoods and rising property values, crime rates drop. Residents feel a renewed sense of pride and investment in their communities. Infrastructure and housing projects gain momentum, revitalizing once-neglected areas. Access to better jobs steers individuals away from criminal activities.

Improved public transportation fosters integration across the city. People from diverse backgrounds and neighborhoods interact more frequently, creating a more connected and culturally rich environment. This increase in social interaction helps to create healthier communities. 

Abandoned homes find new occupants. Housing prices decrease, making Baltimore a more accessible place to live for all residents, and the housing crisis ends. 

Employers take note of these positive changes, finding Baltimore a more attractive location due to its robust public transportation and thriving community. The city begins to grow and expand its tax base, bringing in more revenue for the state. 

As a result of the success and economic growth, the state continues to expand its network of rail systems, further integrating the city and compounding the effects. 

##

This illustration might exaggerate a bit, but it effectively shows how transit can be a catalyst for Baltimore. 

Many people see rail as a cataylst project in much of the same I do. This is why the redline project has been relaunched and the state is pursuing development. However, Maryland has continually fallen behind in this area. And it's important the state makes this a priority rather than a side project given it's potentially enormous impact. I'm going to try to follow and track this project and learn more. 


